<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    
    <head>
        
        <title>Letter I of Eliza Wilkinson, during the invasion and possession of Charleston, S.C., by the British in the Revolutionary WarLetters of Eliza Wilkinson, during the invasion and possession of Charleston, S.C., by the British in the Revolutionary War</title>
        
    </head>
    
    <body>
        
        <div>
            
            <header>Introductory remarks. British outrages at the North. A Negro 
                woman announces the approach of the enemy within five miles of 
                <a href="#placename001">
                    Yonge's Island.
                </a> 
                Terror of the women. 
                <a href="#person001">
                    Mrs. Wilkinson
                </a> 
                goes to 
                <a href="#place002">
                    Wadmalaw
                </a>
                . Distress at leaving her old father. Meets 
                a boat-load of fugitive women and children on their way to 
                <a href="#place003">
                    Charles-town,
                </a>
            </header>
            
            
            <p>As I mean never to forget the  and  of the renowned Britons while among us, in 
                the ever-memorable 
                
                I shall transmit you a 
                brief account of their  behavior to my 
                <a href="#person003">Father</a> 
                and 
                family, where you will find me sufficiently punished for 
                being something of an unbeliever heretofore. You 
                know we had always heard most terrible accounts of 
                the actions of the 
                <a href="#org001">British troops</a>
                at the northward; 
                but, (fool that I was,) I thought they must be exaggerat- 
                ed, for I could not believe that a nation so famed for 
                humanity, and many other virtues, should, in so short a 
                time, divest themselves of even the least trace of what 
                they once were. </p>
            
            <p>Surely, said I, they can't, in so short a time, have 
                commenced savages, and lost those virtues which have 
                distinguished them from other nations. Yet, sometimes, 
                when I heard fresh accounts of their cruelty to our 
                Northern brethren when in their power, I could not re- 
                press my indignation against the barbarous, hard-hearted 
                Britons, (how changed their character!) and believed, or 
                almost believed, what I had heard of them. I say , 
                for I was so infatuated with what I had formerly heard 
                and read of Englishmen, that I thought humanity, and 
                every manly sentiment, were their inherent qualities; — 
                though I cannot but say that, much as I had admired 
                the former lustre of the British character, my soul 
                shrunk from the thought of having any communication 
                with a people who had left their homes with a direct in- 
                tention to imbrue their hands in the blood of my beloved 
                countrymen, or deprive them of their birthright, Liberty 
                and property. The thought alarmed me, shocked me. 
                I began to look on the Britons in earnest as enemies.</p>
            
            <p>At length I heard they had got possession of the 
                <a href="#place004">
                    Georgia State
                </a>
                , and used the inhabitants cruelly, paying 
                no respect to age or sex; but then, again, I heard to the 
                contrary, that their behavior to the ladies was unex- 
                ceptionable. I did not know what to think, much less 
                what to do, should they invade our State, which was 
                daily expected.</p>
            
            <p>Thousands would I have given to have been in any 
                part of the globe where I might not see them, or to have 
                been secure from the impending evils, which were ready 
                to burst over our heads.</p>
            
            <p>I was in 
                <a href="#place003">
                    Charlestown
                </a> 
                when we heard that a large 
                party of them had landed somewhere near 
                <a href="#place005">
                    Beaufort.
                </a> 
                I saw several detachments of our
                <a href="#org002">Southern troops</a> 
                leave 
                town to oppose the invaders of their country. They 
                marched with the greatest alacrity imaginable, not re- 
                garding the weather, though the rain poured down inces- 
                santly upon them. I cannot describe my feelings upon 
                this sight — gratitude, affection, and pity for my country- 
                men filled my heart and my eyes, which pursued them 
                until out of sight, and then every good wish attended 
                them. However, it was not long before our little band 
                of patriots returned to their homes in triumph, excepting 
                a few, who had sealed the cause with their blood. Peace 
                to their ashes, and everlasting happiness to their immor- 
                tal part.</p>
            
            <p>
                
                <blockquote> "Well have they perished — -for in fight they fell."</blockquote> 
                I think old 
                <a href="">Priam</a> 
                says this of his sons, who fell at the siege of 
                <a href="">
                    Troy.
                </a>
                But who can forbear the tear of sympa- 
                thy for the distressed families, who are left behind to 
                mourn the fall of those they highly valued, and from 
                whom they derived their support ? Pitiable reflection! 
                
                <blockquote>"How seldom do the rich feel the distresses of the poor, 
                    and in the midst of conquest and acclamation, who re- 
                    gardeth the tears and afflictions of those who have lost 
                    their friends in the public?"</blockquote>
            </p>
            
            <p>Now, the time drew near when this State was to have 
                her day of suffering in sympathy with her sister States. 
                Oh, how I dreaded the approaching enemy! I had 
                thoughts (with my other friends,) to go higher up the 
                country to avoid them; but as my 
                <a href="#person003">Father</a>
                , with many 
                others of my relations, had not conveniences ready to car- 
                ry off their effects with them, and as the enemy aproach- 
                ed rapidly, they agreed to stay. It was a melancholy 
                sight to see such crowds of helpless, distressed women, 
                weeping for husbands, brothers, or other near relations 
                and friends, who were they knew not where, whether 
                dead or alive. When the enemy were at 
                <a href="#place006">
                    Ashepoo,
                </a> 
                or 
                somewhere thereabouts, 
                <a href="#person004">my sister</a> 
                and 
                <a href="#person005">sister-in-law</a>
                were 
                then at my 
                <a href="#person003">Father's</a>
                , when one Sunday morning a negro 
                wench, who had been out visiting, came running home 
                in a violent hurry, informing us that a party of British 
                horse were then at 
                <a href=""> Mr. W.'s,</a> 
                not above five or six miles 
                from us. </p>
            
            <p>A boy on the road had informed our servant of the 
                approach of the enemy. This created such confusion 
                and distress among us all as I cannot describe. A boat 
                was immediately pushed off. 
                <a href="#person004">
                    My sister Yonge 
                </a>
                ,
                <a href="#person005"> 
                    my sis-ter Smilie, 
                </a>
                and myself, were desirous of putting the evil 
                day afar off; so we went over the river to 
                <a href="#person006">
                    Mr. Smilie's.
                </a>
                <a href="#person003">Father</a> 
                and 
                <a href="#person007">Mother</a> 
                ventured to stay at home. Melan- 
                choly were the adieus on both sides. We had got but a 
                small distance from the house when we met another lady, 
                who, upon receiving the like information, had walked 
                about two miles, (if not more,) to 
                <a href="#person003">Father's</a>. 
                She joined us 
                and away we went, often looking back, with watery 
                eyes, to our 
                <a href="#person003">Father's</a> 
                dwelling, thinking, at the same time, 
                that in all probability, even while we were looking, he 
                might be suffering all the insults and cruelties that a 
                remorseless gang of barbarians could inflict. These 
                thoughts drew sighs and tears from us; however, we 
                made the best of it, and endeavored to console one 
                another the best we could; but poor was that consola- 
                tion, you may think.</p>
            
            <p>We had but just got over, when a scene presented it- 
                self to us, enough to move the hardest heart in the Brit- 
                ish army could they have seen it. This was a large 
                boat-load of women and children on their way to 
                <a href="#place003">
                    Charlestown,
                </a> 
                as that place promised more safety than 
                any other. They called at 
                <a href="#person006">
                    Mr. Smilie's
                </a>
                , and staid a day 
                or two. I pitied them all greatly, (though we were 
                much in the same situation;) one lady especially, who 
                had seven children, and one of them but a fortnight old ; 
                thus, in her weakly situation, to venture her life and 
                that of her babe, rather than fall into the hands of an 
                enemy, whose steps have been marked with cruelty and 
                oppression. Surely, if the British knew the misery they 
                occasion, they would abate their rigor, and blush to think 
                that the name of Englishman, (once so famous among 
                the Fair,) should now produce terror and dismay in every 
                female breast. I'll now lay by my pen — Farewell.</p>
            
            <p>I will proceed by and bye with my narrative, for the 
                various scenes I've been witness to are so much in my 
                head, that I shall not want subjects to employ my pen for 
                some time.</p>
            
        </div>
    </body>
</html>